Thank you for the discussion and for your attention.
Mr Kalousek, deputy Kalousek.
I don't know under what political framework it was reworked, and it cannot be done otherwise.
The state budget is political.
That, which is on the table, is composed according to realistic growth estimates, realistic wage and reasonable expense estimates.
I am aware, that time timeline is known, that it turns in the direction of higher deficit, but where did the tiny deficits, those that were so tightly pressed down, the extremely restrictive budget policy forming a different timeline of systematic drops, where this extremely restrictive fiscal policy and this saving up paradigm, saving up among other things I might add, sending the economy into recession for several quarters.
Let's keep this in mind.
This is why the budget is constructed this way, slightly expansive.
It's no miracle, it does not care for the renewal of fragile growth and that is why I once again ask, I appeal, pass it to the next hearing.
The Ministry of the Environment also conceived a program for preventing more waste.
Today, a new period has begun, which of course means a completely new waste regulation law, which should greatly increase waste recycling, of biological waste for example, but also other types, so we can reach a proper European level, because now we are very much below average.
Projects under the banner of the operational programme Environment of the State Environmental Fund greatly helped to improve the quality of air and water, as well as reduce energy strain. Hundreds of projects, along seven challenge axes, were supported at the price 27 billion crowns for this period with the aim to better individual components.
Ladies and gentlemen, much work is ahead of us.
I hope that when presenting the assessment of the state of the environment for 2013 and the following years I'll bring you better news.
Thank you for attention.
I need to remind you, as a former member of the Ministry of the Interior: How is it possible, that some documents suddenly disappeared from the safe of the minister of the interior, whom I shall not name, may almighty God bless him, these documents containing the proof that many people were informants of the communist secret police, or maybe worse, the KGB?
I fear that these documents are still out there, and they may be discovered, if need be.
I want to say one thing.
It's absolutely not right to abolish this law, and not for some de-iure or de-facto reason, but because many people were wrongly accused, released or put on a list, but I know for sure, because in 1977 I was interrogated by two members of the secret police in a forest, for which I was then rebuked by my former colleagues, who had the documents, for if the 50s were to repeat themselves, many people working at the regional administration of the Ministry of the Interior would have been shot.
And they archived that perfectly.
The floor is yours, madame deputy.
Dear Mr chairman, dear Mr deputy, I will only repeat my conviction. That this regulation is, as the recent practice of the Constitutional Court suggests, not an optimal rule from the formal point of view.
I will not revoke it.
It will be part of the new law proposal regarding the office of state attorney.
It's now being prepared and we will present it to the Chamber of Deputies this year.
This does not change anything with regards to the contents of this regulation, which I, on the other hand, consider beneficial, because especially when it comes to serious cases of economic criminal acts, where the state attorney watches over a concrete subject. It would not be right for a subject to be excluded to another proceeding, when it's supposed to be a collective proceeding. This would mean another case for an unknowing attorney, who is going to have to study the case all over again.
So, all in all, from what I'm hearing, I originally wanted to of course support the inclusion of usury as part of these regulations.
Currently I'm more inclined to believe that the offer of madame minister of justice of some sort of analysis on how the law works in practice, and the necessity of elaborate amendments, appear more reasonable.
And of course, I am inclined to support the future government proposal, which has been offered here and which is to address all of these doubts of ours and added that which is needed.
Thank you for attention.
Thank you, madame deputy.
I would like to ask if someone else would like to add to the common discussion.
If it's not the case, I hereby declare the common discussion over and ask the petitioner if he wishes to have a final word.
Thank you for giving me the floor.
Dear Mr, vice-chairman, esteemed colleagues, the proposal, which was just put forward, print number 106, aims to reduce processing impact of distraint above the material law framework adjustment of shared wealth of a married couple.
This proposal, just as the previous one, was put forward during the last electoral period, the legislative procedure was not completed however, because as we all know the Chamber was being dissolved.
The amendment from the 1st of January 2018, which is now in force, presumes distraint or material and other possession execution, which are in the possession of the husband, mandatory, if he's under such scrutiny or if it concerns shared property.
According to us, this amendment has several theoretical and practical issues.
It's necessary to stress out that distraint is a tool of processing law, which should not resolve material questions by the application of processing prerequisites.
Thank you, madame minister, my thanks to the correspondent and I conclude this point.
At the same time, I will hand over the moderating of this session, but before that Mr chairman of the Social democratic deputy club.
Mr Chairman, the floor is yours.
Thank you for giving me the floor.
Dear, Mr chairman, esteemed colleagues, considering that the point which was just terminated took up the entire morning despite the predictions, I dare come before you with procedural proposals.
On one hand so that all of the points, which were firmly ranked for this morning, can be ranked it the same way this afternoon after the election bloc.
At the same time so that in accordance with § 95 of the discussion order voice out agreement to discuss law proposals in third hearing after 14: 00.
Good pre-noon to you, my dear colleagues.
I take it as two procedural proposes of Mr chairman of the deputy club of ČSSD Sklenák, about which we will now vote without discussion.
So the first proposal is the discussion order enabling that in specifically reasoned cases we may move the block of strictly ranked points today after 14 o'clock and 30 minutes.
These strictly ranked points, which were included today morning.
By making this agreement, the Czech Republic is granted the possibility to ask the appropriate office of a signed state for information, which are reasonably important for investigating and determining the amount of taxes. This includes the investigation or prosecution of tax-related crimes.
The contracting parties pledge themselves to, when asked by another, to provide information from banks or other financial institutions.
Aside from assessing the amount of taxes, it is expected these policies will increase tax discipline of our tax residents in the future.
Negotiating this treaty should also have a positive fiscal impact on wages in the Czech Republic and aid further finance crime prevention.
The presented treaty was agreed to according to a text framework verified by government decision no. 227, date 22nd March 2010, and meets OECD standards for international information exchange of taxes.
The subjects of this treaty are in effect for taxation, which is in accordance with legal norms of contracting parties.
Information acceded according to this treaty are subject to "tax discretion."
Madame chair, fellow deputies, I'm glad that the opposition will release, or at least is willing to release, this draft for second hearing.
I would like to respond to what Mr Stanjura said and what he had to deal with from his position of minister for transport had to, albeit for a short time, deal with.
Unlike Mr Stanjura, who himself has said it took him 3.5 or 4 months, I had 72 hours for the vehicle database.
Minister Žák, my direct predecessor, announced a selection procedure for an operator with the last term for application being 27.3., while the contract made by Mr Stanjura with the current contractor was to be terminated on the 30th. I only had 72 hours to prevent the database from crashing down and hordes of citizens standing in queue, holding license plates to register.
I ask minister Mládek to tell the chamber, why he was not able to obtain security clearance from the Czech institutions.
What were the reasons this security clearance was denied, and according to what data of the Czech secret services does the Russian secret service keep a portfolio about him.
The reality is such, that at this moment there's a fragile ceasefire in eastern Ukraine.
Does anyone really believe that this would be possible without western sanctions against Russia?
What is the prime minister's and the government's attitude to foreign policy and safety of our citizens?
I do not know, after this discussion and the prime minister's speech, I really do not know.
What other alternative offered by the prime minister and the government is there for the security of the Czech Republic and its citizens, other than joining the EU's sanctions?
I did not notice any.
And do we even have a framework of foreign policy?
The lack of a reasonable and concise foreign policy does not mean that there is no abroad.
And the fact we ignore the danger does not mean it is safe around us.
The danger is around us and it is very real.
The government needs to clearly formulate a foreign policy, and it also needs to formulate how to protect our republic and our citizens.
Thank you for giving me the floor, Mr vice-chairman.
Esteemed colleagues, this regulation, the energy law, is a key regulation not just for energy companies and entrepreneurs, but also for Czech industry and Czech households.
Mr minister outlined several details, which areas the regulation of energy law will be concerned.
I of course recommend passing this amendment though the first hearing to the economy board.
It will certainly be a crucial discussion in the economy board, because the topics have their impacts, as I said, on all areas of life.
I will be looking forward to the expert debate in the relevant economy board.
Thank you for attention.
I thank you, Mr reporter.
I declare the open discussion, to which I see three entries with preferential right.
The first is Mr chairman Okamura, after that Mr chairman Fiala. and after that vice-chairman Filip.
The floor is yours, Mr deputy.
Dear Mr chairman, ladies and gentlemen, to us in Úsvit it's clear as day, that it's necessary to modify the current energy law with regards to current practise.
However, according to our opinion the proposed law is another legal cockup alike to the civil code or service code.
The entire expert public energy experts, entrepreneurs and even the Energy regulation office, agree that it's a bad one.
Yesterday, a seminar on this topic hosted by our Úsvit deputy Olga Havlová occurred in the Chamber of Deputies, which was completely full, and some very serious remarks were made.
So many, that even by recounting them I would spend more time than healthy, that is why I will shorten my speech and mention only the crucial ones.
Despite the fact that I don't consider the government proposal systemically correct, I propose to let it pass to the first hearing today and give order to the wise budget board, where it may be possible to find space to find a solution, which would first of all prevent disruptions of general principles outlined by the original law, currently in force, in other words, to let the mechanism or coefficient work automatically, no matter what they are like.
Secondly, to prevent the almost regular so called deciding and bickering about the thing itself, meaning the wages themselves.
And thirdly, to prevent further disruption of equality among the three state powers: juridical, executive and legislative, as it was determined by the Constitutional court in its finding number 181/212.
We can in all honesty say that if such principles will not be accepted as part of the proposed amendment, I will not support it. Thank you.
Yes, thank you.
This concludes the introductory note and I declare an open discussion. I see one request, from deputy Marek Benda, to whom I'm giving the floor right away.
The floor is yours, deputy.
Dear Mr chairman, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, I understand that nobody wants to even bring up the issue of deputy and other government officials and I will not talk about the amount for long and by how much it should or should not be raised because I think all of you know this very well.
We can, of course, look at it from the perspective of raising our wages by 11, 3, 7 or 14% or we can say we're reducing them by 14, 11 or 28%, because we all know what the wage should be next year.
We can also talk about whether it's reasonable and right to let ourselves be free of the system, which was put in place somewhere at the beginning by Vladimír Špidla's government, and which is bound to the average wage in the public sphere.
Many deputies believe that even if the European law requires this of us, it is wrong and can be abused.
Deputy Korte put forth a proposal for alteration regarding this topic, this proposal wasn't accepted by the constitutional board only by a tiny margin.
I suppose Mr Korte will put it forward again, and it's up to this Chamber to deal with it in some way.
I wish to stress out that next to the opinion of the Ministry of industry and trade, the election committee caused a disintegration of the institution of the parliament, which quite clearly, or even very clearly shows that it is not possible to have a regulation of hidden and subliminal advertising as a part of this law.
For some reason, I can't tell, the only rational thing, has already been said, the question of invoice maturity, but it didn't affect just this segment, despite it being referenced in the segment of food processing so much. However, today's topic is the trade law.
The argument of prime minister here, the legislative environment changing in the meantime, was accepted as something of a civil code, and that would be surprisingly interesting, and again missing in the documents, so I think that the proposal doesn't consider the major change of the legal environment in the Czech Republic at all.
Do we have it competed out?
Under whom will they being operating?
Here comes the magnificent amendment, which says something that was said some time ago, that it's possible to supplant electric collars by imprisonment.
Now it, as we all know, doesn't work.
Now we say: it'll even be possible to supplant the procedure of being in custody.
I'm unfortunately afraid that this will not work either, because the organs working in criminal prosecution have custody as a means to soften someone up, and not a tool of protection with accordance to criminal law.
But let us believe that at least when it comes to escape preventing custody it could by some means in a few cases that maybe it could help.
Trust me, that as a man, who believes, that until the person is convicted, he should be regarded as innocent, then if there were units of cases, who won't sit in custody and will be home wearing electric collars, I would always support it.
I would just like to know, to what degree it is actually ready, or if it's only another legislative procedure, which says: we enable something, but factually it isn't done at all.
When after 25 years, the real estate prices got back on track and homeowners and the like, and I understand, that the other side felt the urge for increased taxation.
If you remember who paid the price for living space restitution abandoned after 40 years and who had to pay back the debts, it was of course the people we want to tax now.
But the greatest opponent of the restitution and the settling of historical grudges was obviously the right-wing politician Václav Klaus.
He blocked the restitutions the hardest and maintained the rent regulation, which was then taken up by a man called Křeček.
This Křeček has been causing that for a long-time homeowners supplied the state with regular rents.
So, is this necessary? To tax the people who had to spend 25 years fixing the houses, putting them back together so that cites look a bit better.
For all those, who would perhaps try to claim, that during my evaluation of the Czech Television's activities, I ideologically or otherwise overly subjectively deviated, I once again repeat, that all information available to you come primarily from author of this yearly report and my added value comes mainly from my commentary of putting this information into a different context, than the author originally had in mind.
After I recently evaluated the economy of Czech Television and as a final result determined it non-transparent and to a degree prodigal, my performance was then by some people connected with this institution branded as a purposeful communist attack and by means of a pons asinorum simplified to my dislike of the Historie.cs programme, which I mentioned in a completely different context and very briefly.
Such grave misunderstanding worried me, however after some time I understood everything clearly.
My feelings can be best described by the words of former chief of Czech Television Jana Dědečková, who in an interview said, that Czech Television will consider every criticism a purposeful attack on internal and external colleagues, all the way to the janitors.
And she adds that the public should also not forget that Czech Television distributes completely non-transparently 7 billion crowns worth of license fees among private subjects.
And perhaps that is why instead of much needed self-reflection one bells ringing in alarm and mobilization against critics.
And that's why I think that all possible participants may use during the appeal "minister Ťok criticized prime minister Sobotka.
So, a short comment.
It is quite common that the prime minister criticizes his ministers.
And it's quite uncommon that a government minister is astonished by the words of his own prime minister.
Another person responsible for the current situation is according to Mr minister the ÚOHS and his personal favourite chairman Petr Rafaj.
Here, allow me to cite the words of my esteemed colleague expert of the social democrats for transportation mr deputy Birke, who reacted to minister Ťok's complaints, that ÚOHS is run by a social democrat who does everything to make sure the minister is unsuccessful.
Mr deputy Birke said, or wrote, I have it from the north "As usual it's not Mr Ťok's team's wrong preparation of contracts which is to blame, but external forces now it is supposed to be the social democracy's political directive, that the independent ÚOHS chairman Petr Rafaj complicates the life of Mr minister of transport as much as possible.
Aside from that the social democracy vehemently objects to such an accusation, we would like to advise Mr minister.
The simplest answers are quite often the most correct ones.
He should therefore consider strengthening his team with experienced bureaucrats, who will aid him with preparing similarly difficult competitive tendering.
The employees and the unions will surely be pleased if you support this proposal.
All of the remarks we heard with regards to this proposed law, have been resolved with an elaborate amendatory proposal and I believe that there is no reason to withhold aid for the Czech workers with low or medium wages and help them archive a respectable standard of living even when they're sick.
We will not force them to go to work when they are sick, to spread illnesses, to worsen their health, all of which would cause more strain on the healthcare budget.
So let me ask for your support for this law proposal again.
But I don't wish to appeal.
I wish to ask you.
This is a norm, that greatly contributes to the decrease of harmfulness of these compounds for the people.
As the minister of health, I need to voice my appeal for this law to be passed, however I will plead for it to be passed.
The highest priority, which we all know, is the alarmingly large amount of children who smoke and the large amount of children who drink alcoholic beverages.
That is why I ask you, let us think of the children first of all, let's think of the future, it's after all why we are all sitting here.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would therefore like to ask you that when you consider the proposed amendments, to please take into account all of this, and to support the law and to pass.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr minister.
And I open the discussion, to which I see the entry of deputy Klán.
The floor is yours, please.
In the material I have had prepared, there is a beautiful argument for limiting the powers of local police when it comes to gauging speed or observing the safety of road users, which will of course lower the number of discovered offenses, which would otherwise be found out about and fined, however it will not reduce the number of offenses themselves.
Those, that happen where the drivers do not respect the town speed limit.
We are at the first hearing now, so I consider my presentation a foreword or opinion and argument statement and I will gladly participate in these discussions with my colleagues of the boards.
Even here in the plenum, I will be pleading, as it were, and trying to suggest that the powers of local police when it comes to observing the safety of road users are not restricted, to allow local policemen to operate as they have up until now.
Thank you for attention.
We currently have three ways to understand and educate in the area that we can understand as the professional expertise of a nurse, very simply put.
And it's where I think the issues start to crop up.
I think this law somewhat addresses the current situation and it is probably necessary to accept it in this form. It's my adamant belief that we, as the Civic Democratic Party, will support it. However, it's also necessary to accept that the problem originated from a flawed setting.
Education must be succeeded by employment, such is life, therefore the scope of learning must be clearly defined by what the person will do as a job which is the aim of the education process.
That was the first note.
The second note.
Mixing up tools, which are meant to specifically serve macro-awareness of regulation tools, with the monetary policy is methodically quite wrong.
We cannot simply react with a blunt tool, such as interest rates, or any other tool of monetary policy such as exchange rate, when the situation specifically develops in a critical direction in a single sector, however important it may be, that being mortgage loans.
It is not reasonable to cut down monetary policy by creating money, in this case mortgage money in banks, when giving credit to companies.
On the contrary, it's good that in this situation, when there's demand and companies can get credit without problem, so there's no reason to cut them down with an over the board strict monetary policy.
In other words, that's why we need the distinctive delicate tools, so that we can react to individual segments of credit market.
In the United States, they forgot about regular Americans, who were affected by this globalization as a whole and they were excluded from various labour processes, when they fell into poverty or into the social class which we now call precariat, a class, which must work in second-rate positions for a tiny reward, in unstable positions etc.
And this of course reflects in our circumstances, this negative trend of globalization, and it is necessary to discuss it.
Of course, it doesn't have much to do with the Paris climate agreement, but here I point to the conflicts and the comparisons, which we must of course discuss.
Well, keeping global warming in some way strongly below two degrees Celsius when compared to pre-industrial levels and get as close as possible to 1.5 degrees Celsius will be quite a difficult task at the moment, when we have all built on non-renewable resources.
Naturally, I understand, that it's the most profitable, of course squeeze as much as possible, because for the corporations it means profit and the want to invest in renewable resources is not there.
Of course, the investment is happening there, the developments also exist.
Perhaps all of us remember the problem České Budějovice, or the Budějovice Budweiser, had with their competitor Anheuser Busch and the trademark issues, which have taken years all over the world.
It was declined.
The ministry tried to keep the trademark, but the European Union refused, saying Canada will not accept it.
I ask therefore, how long and how much will our precious gem, that is Budweiser, enjoy the protection granted by this internation agreement, and how serious we can consider what the ministry says, that there is nothing preventing further negotiations about adding more and more names, which is the one and only, and we value it quite highly, because it's not just regional, but state renowned, maybe Europe renowned Budweiser Budvar and its protection.
So now we need to say that the ministry's answer amounts to the European union not caring that much about the individual needs and aims for something a bit different.
I'm curious as to how much I will have because I levied 350 million to our budgets.
So yes, the pension reform proposal for which we had had a commission for 25 years and to my knowledge, the preceding government did not receive anything, in fact, the MPSV was not my responsibility.
And we truly want a retirement reform, as we have it in our policy statement and the first step is to push through an amendment of the pension security scheme, which will increase the base amount of pension to 10% of the average wage, to which, as far as I'm aware, you agreed, this will help increase the standard of living of people with low pensions, for whom the base amount is a large part of pension.
This amendment will also increase pension by 1000 crown for people aged 85 or older, for whom the amount of pension, due to economic power of valorisation, decreases after a long time because it lags behind the average wage development, which is substantial.
The amendment proposal was passed by the government on the 27th of February of this year and today it passed the first hearing.
When it comes to the discounts, they're devised in a way that the pupils and students from 6 to 15 years old are allowed to apply them regardless of whether they're going from their place of residence to school or not, as it has been until now, the discount will also be valid during summer break.
It's accessible for passengers aged 15 or less, who do not have to show any ID because they simply do not have it yet, those aged 15 to 18 need to show some identification, be it their official identity card or a student card such as a valid ISIC card, or, as you mentioned, a student certificate, which has its limits but according to law and the Ministry of Finance's regulation is still valid.
I have to say, that when discussing this point, I'm greatly saddened by the imprudence, maybe even impoliteness, impoliteness to their colleagues, expressed by the social democratic party.
Because I clearly remember the time, when at the beginning, couple of months ago, your senator came to me with some of your members, because I'm someone who deals with the public affairs, but perhaps also knowing that I'm the chairman of the hospice of Prachatice, telling me that the problem is here and that you would like to solve it, that it's an apolitical issue, best resolved by a senate proposal.
We therefore studied it and determined it was indeed so, because the double standard is present, which is why we supported this proposal, which has changed.
The mandate and immunity board began discussing this issue at their 15th meeting held on the 5th of September 2018, and with resolution 66 interrupting the talks till 25th September 2018.
That day the appeal of the police will be discussed first by the mandate and immunity board.
Under these circumstances I would like to appeal to the Chamber of Deputies, even though the proceeding of the Chamber of Deputies will continue in the variable week, and due to work reasons the present deputy Zdeněk Ondráček will not attend. He would therefore not have the opportunity to participate and discuss the topic of his release for the purpose of criminal prosecution and voice his opinion.
I therefore put forward a proposal, for the Chamber of Deputies to interrupt the discussion on this topic and include it on the programme of the 20th meeting of the Chamber of Deputies.
And I'm sad, that in the state budget proposal these areas are albeit partially looked into, but when it comes to how the bark beetle disaster, especially the bark beetle disaster of this year, spread out and how, according to expert predictions, it will develop in the years to come, and unrestricted, so I'm convinced that these measures, set up by means of acting ministries are insufficient.
In this aspect I appeal to the government, and I would also like to appeal to you, my dear colleagues, that when discussing the state budget, when it comes to the issue of solving the bark beetle disaster and the drought issue that we bring in further financial assets and more importantly look even for the practical solutions.
Now we are already focusing on two gestions, or two chapters of state budget which are close to me, those are the chapter of Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and Ministry of Health.
When it comes to the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, it is no secret that when it comes to volume, it is one of the largest chapters, and also when it comes to structure of the budget of the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, it is here where we discuss them regularly under all debates in the boards and even during the concluding hearing of the state budget and it is probably no surprise.
So what the people really expect, what the 65 000 class teachers, all teacher en-bloc really expect from us, because the following point, meaning discussing decision no 66 of the Chamber of Deputies, which clearly states there was a decision towards the government and it did not act.
The teachers should have received a pay rise from the 1st of September this year and the wages did not change.
That was an introduction, the inclusion of this point is clearly obstructive.
Now, let's move to the discussed amendment proposal of settlement of property law.
This proposed amendment, as has been mentioned several times previously, touches a situation, which even according to constitutional lawyers, borders, as I have said previously, on the edge of law and constitutionality.
When I asked the prime minister of this country during the interpellation, if he could support his claims, that the financial compensations were overextended by 54 billion, he responded by saying he based them on the words of deputy Hašek, who said them right here, behind this microphone in the Chamber of Deputies.
Minister Staňek's factual note is next.
The floor is yours, Mr minister.
Thank you, Mr chairman.
I would like to perhaps push the debate, which keeps revolving around the financial solution for land and estate, further.
I believe that the demand for madame minister of finance and Mr minister of justice to be present is an attempt to stall and disrupt this session, because, and I cannot give a clear answer since I didn't work elaborately on this issue, but according to the study of the Research Institute of Agricultural Economy, commissioned by the Ministry of Culture, which was asked to verify the calculations regarding the price of agricultural estate, which at the time were 500 crowns per meter squared depending on the field's acreage, its future use and location.
The price is vastly different for fields of 10 hectares of more, far from built-up areas and in the countryside.
What is so important in this elaborate amendatory proposal and what makes it stand out is the fact it introduces cooperation between the Czech Administration of Social Support and the State Institute for Drug Control. The purpose of this is to allow the former to verify the identity of a general practitioner by granting it the right to look at access certificates of medical service providers, issued by SÚKL.
And another important point is that with the enter in force 1st January 2020, it does not consider the inclusion of the information systems of the Czech Administration of Social Support into the unified information system of the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, and there in effect, we suppose it going into force on the 1st of January 2020.
In other aspects, this complex amendatory proposal is indeed very elaborate, and I could provide reasoning for every individual paragraph, but as I said, all of this can be found in the substantiation. The thing I have presented are the main points, by which it differs from the others, at least in the form I could study, the form that can be found in the system.
Please, the floor is yours.
Thank you for giving me the floor, Mr chairman.
Dear colleagues, esteemed members of the government, in my speech I would like to mention what sort of political culture is ruling currently, and I will mention those, who are responsible for this state.
In our free country, every citizen has the right to express his opinion, which is guaranteed by our constitution.
The constitution also states that citizens may elect representatives, who arise from democratic elections, and they will then participate in leading our country.
Every citizen can freely decide who and what political grouping he will support.
The winner of the elections should then be respected by all and regarded with respect by them, even if they do not count among those for whom they voiced their support during the elections.
This conduct and behaviour distinguish a cultured, ethical, social and sociable maturity of citizens.
I have my opinion and I case the majority has a different one, then I can conform and respect it. By unacceptable means, they are being fed un-truths, and as a Czech proverb says, a lie repeated a hundred times become the truth.
I have my opinion and I case the majority has a different one, then I can conform and respect it. By unacceptable means, they are being fed un-truths, and as a Czech proverb says, a lie repeated a hundred times become the truth.
And some political subject built their propagation upon this.
I need to mention, that a large share of this state is held by the current Ministry of the Interior under ČSSD chairman Jan Hamáček.
It is precisely the resort of the Ministry of the Interior, which should not support hatred among citizens and should strictly prosecute all forms or hints of unlawful acts, especially with political undertone.
The fact that the Ministry of Interior does not behave like that is proved for example by quotes cited against our SPD movement, which were published by the security policy department of the Ministry of the Interior in a report titled Expressions of extremism and prejudice hatred, a summarizing situation report of the fourth quarter of 2018.
The authors of this report perhaps for the reason of becoming appealing to Mr minister attack our SPD movement and mention that we belong among the political subjects, who build their programme predominantly on anti-Muslim, anti-immigrant and anti-Roma rhetoric and on extreme nationalism.
The authors of this report wished to, so to speak, strike the same note with minister Hamáček, so they included the quote aimed against our movement in the report title, and even though the report cites, that the SPD movement is according to the definition of the Ministry of the Interior not an extremist movement.
This means that it was necessary to make up some term which would disparage the SPD movement, and so prejudice hatred was made up.
We are discussing next year's state budget of the Czech Republic, the most important matter that can be discussed by the Chamber of Deputies every year.
When I look behind me, the number of ministers of the government of the Czech Republic present does not reflect this, and neither does the absence of the prime minister of this government, Mr Andrej Babiš.
I understand he is bound by his duties abroad, however I believe that the prime minister's schedule should be able to adapt and allow him to be present, especially when the Chamber of Deputies is discussing budget, he should be here alongside madame minister of finance, and he should be the one to present us with strategies for developing the Czech Republic during the years to come.
I will attempt to list a couple of reasons later during the discussion itself, madam deputy Kovářová will present a more substantial analysis of reason, which lead us, as the STAN movement, to not support the budget in this form.
At its 13th session on the 14th of December the Senate has decided to return the amendment of the law of state social support, by the means of an amendatory proposal.
The contents of this proposal, which we bring before you, to give you the gist, expand the range of people, who would be entitled to parental benefits with the new limit of 300 thousand crowns, which would also apply to the parents who up until the day of the new law amendment of parental benefits already exhausted the limit.
From the Senate talks, we welcome the government's decision to increase parental benefits after 12 years.
We think it is important to conduct pro-family politics especially during the times, when our demographical indexes show that the society is getting old.
Madam minister, the floor is yours.
Dear my chairman, thank you for giving me the floor.
Just a reminder, it really is a very brief proposal and an exchange of a single word, this means instead of "chairman of the government" the law will now state that the fund council is led by "a member of the government, whose position is given by the government.
The Chamber of Deputies accepted the proposal on the 8th of November 2019.
The proposal was then discussed by the Senate Board for Regional Cooperation, public administration and environment.
The Board advised the Senate to return the proposal back to the Chamber of Deputies with an amendatory proposal.
This proposal adds a condition according to which the member or chairman of the Council must not be in a conflict of interests as outlined by paragraph 61 of the directive of the European parliament and Council number 2018 / 10 46, so called fiscal directive.
We don't agree with the Senate's amendatory proposal, because the suggested amendment is redundant and non-systemic.
The regulation of the fiscal directive is of course directly applicable in the Czech legal framework and generally concerns a large number of persons and a large quantity of cases modified by many intra-state regulations.
The government discussed this amendment on the 18. 12. 2019 and concluded with an agreement.
This amendment, put forward by the deputies, is an uncompromising proposal, which stemmed from several hearings of the committee for the proceeding code of the Chamber of Deputies, formed with the aegis of the chairman, and which is comprised of selected members of all deputy clubs, the Ministry of Justice, Legislative department of the Chamber office and the State reconstruction organization.
The objections raised by the deputies when discussing this law have been taken into account in print number 347 of this election period.
In contrast to the previously mentioned one, this proposal is content-wise narrower. However, new modifications, mainly technical ones, have appeared, as well as those inspired by the proposed modifications.
To the end, that the in-debt person may make use of protection time, it will be sufficient, that he presents his intention to the creditor and say that he is doing so as a consequence of the COVID 19 pandemic.
Creditors don't re-examine the presentation and for the repayment shift they won't be able to charge no fee.
Moreover, not all loan providers began giving those in debt the possibility of interruption or other repayment modifications.
The proposal introduces a so-called protection time, during which, according to the indebt person's preference, interrupts his repayment for three, or for six months according to his choice.
For the duration of choosing, the consumer and OSVČ do not pay back the debt, all future payments are for the appropriate time postponed, the principal sum will remain changing interest, but the interest rate will in case of the consumer limited to the height of repo-interest plus 8 percentual points, which today means nine percent points, or the credit caused by delay according to civil code.
The protection time can be applied even to artificial persons, for who it is however proposed, that for the duration of protection they can only put off repayments of principal sum but continue gradually paying interests.
The Chamber of Deputies alerts the government to the lack of a general legal solution, which would outline the remedial measures for extremely indebt municipalities, and appeals to the government, to prepare a proposal jointly produced by the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Justice and put it forward with a solution acceptable for overly indebt municipalities till the end of 2020. I would say it's crucial.
Especially so now, when the critical situation could result in more indebt municipalities.
I originally proposed an amendment, but after a negative, albeit correct, reaction of the Ministry of Finance, as I have mentioned when talking with madame minister, I decided not to propose the amendment and only propose an accompanying resolution to appeal to the appropriate ministries. This issue needs to be resolved and an agreement must be reached.
The Ministry of Finance has some idea about this, however the Ministry of Justice has a different one, therefore it's crucial to reach an agreement.
Dear colleagues, fellow deputies, I would like to respond to what my two colleagues said a while ago.
Together with deputy Krutálková, we visited the Karlovy vary region, and its stunning beauty was a great surprise for us, however this region has a great many issues.
And as my colleague, Mr Stanjura said via the chairman, the problem is a system one. It is necessary to fix the transport infrastructure and that is not something that can be done in a couple of years.
That's why I think that if we speak about 210 million for three regions it is not something which could put the budget in jeopardy and could be a massive aid for these three regions.
Not even director Beneš said anything, nothing at all, he only said they could not go empty-handed and not everyone could be a part of it, that they, as an economic subject, are not capable of this, despite the fact they pledged themselves and they should have addressed the Ministry of Industry and Trade with "Documentation containing a safety tool in the form of retrograding a dangerous contractor by the means of a government decision, as well as the possibility of excluding a dangerous subcontractor."
That is all there. However, as we have said before, such a step would yield a high probability of arbitrage or other serious consequences for the Czech Republic in a time of very stretched future budgets. "When it comes to the contractor, the assignment documentation grants this possibility to the government only after the entire minimally two-year tender has passed. For security reasons.
Concerning subcontractors, the documentation grants the state several options to intervene the subcontracting process, wherein the possibilities of the state are paradoxically greater than those of the competitor.
So I would like to ask you, Mr minister, what is the plan after three weeks?
What will happen with schools?
Which ones will be open, which pupils will come back to school, and which will not, and under what circumstances?
Does it stand that now we switched off the schools for weeks to allow the situation to calm down, after which the pupils, who attended schools before, return no matter the circumstances, or will we wait for three weeks, await that, which is going to happen, and only after that we decided to suddenly release maybe a certain group of pupils to schools and in the last moment we will solve that they need to be tested, that we will vaccinate their teachers etc?
This means: When will the pupils go back to schools, kindergarten, elementary school, lower secondary school, special schools or other grades?
Under what circumstances?
When the situation gets better, when it gets worse, when it remains the same, or the circumstances do not matter?
When the situation gets better, when it gets worse, when it remains the same, or the circumstances do not matter? During three weeks of the strictest measures, which are set up like that, as predicted by the prediction models, to the turn-over of the epidemiological curve and situation, and consequently, if this trend continues I will only repeat, that by returning students to schools and here real coordination with the Ministry of Education is needed, because as we discussed until now, that priority are students of grades before finals and students of last years of elementary schools because of entrance exams, so there is a question, if during this time there will be a reconsideration on part of the MŠMT, but that which is being done already, is the pedagogue vaccination, so that this area is resolved.
Enough tests, which thanks to the fact, that because they are mandatorily established in other enterprises and since next week even in state administration, there will be enough even for the so-called self-testing, and the decision, in which specific week it will be, I cannot tell you right now, because it would be promising a date, which may, or may not come into force.
Now, I invite our colleagues from ÚFAL, Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, in Prague, if I need to add.
So, I invite Ondřej Dušek, Rudolf Rosa and Tomáš Musil who agreed to do the mentoring.
Could you please join me on the stage and introduce here what kind of help do you offer.
I think –
Who’s on Zoom?
Ondra?
So, Ondra, please.
I’m Ondřej from Matfyz, as Tomáš mentioned.
I work as an assistant professor.
My specialisation is natural language processing.
Mainly, I focus on chatbots, or more precisely on dialogue systems and on natural language generation.
So, I can help with some tips for a machine learning approach to these things or with some tools etc.
That’s it for me.
Now, our colleagues who are here, in Švanda Theatre.
Rudolf, how can you help?
I’m Rudolf.
I’m a computational linguist from Matfyz as well.
So, quite the similar, some kind of text processing, text linguistic analysis, text generation, application of the translation tools we have for translation.
We have many APIs for these kinds of things.
Hi, I’m Tomáš.
I study representations of meaning.
I can help with machine learning concerning text or image processing.
Great, thank you to my colleagues, mentors, for introducing themselves either here or on Zoom.
Gentlemen, could you please move to the armchairs, as we have now, after the introduction of mentors, a workshop ahead of us.
During these thirty-one minutes we have left until twelve o’clock, we will be talking with Rudolf and Tomáš.
And I’ll ask David Košťák, dramaturg of Švanda Theatre, and Martina Kinská, also a dramaturg of Švanda Theatre, to come here and sit.
And we have thirty seconds left before the workshop starts – not as a public, but as a Zoom meeting – and before a detailed introduction of our challenges takes place.
If you want to know, when will you learn more about the challenges and have an opportunity to discuss them.
It’s on Zoom.
So go to our Slack channel Robothon.
If you don’t know how to get there, go to the page of Robothon CZ, there’s a button with a link that will lead you there. And from twelve p.m., after the workshop, comes the topic of “THEaiTRE”.
Which is a project of AI writing a play together with humans and from twelve p.m. it will be followed by the detailed description of the challenges.
Now I invite all to join our discussion.
I’ll be talking with Rudolf Rosa and Tomáš Musil, both from the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University.
My next guest will be David Košťák and Martina Kinská form Švanda Theatre.
And we will be talking about the project of a theatre play written by people aided by AI.
This play will premiere in about a month, on 26th February, here in Švanda Theatre, where we are streaming Robothon right now.
Let’s get this started.
I’ll join this project for a while.
And maybe I’ll make a brief –
I’ll make a brief introduction.
The project resulted from a frustration that there are no celebrations of the centenary of the word “robot” that emerged on 25th January 1921 within the first night of the play RUR.
That took place in the National Theatre.
Another, illegal premiere took place in Hradec Králové.
That was even before the official one.
After one hundred years, thanks to Rudolf and our colleagues from Švanda Theatre like Daniel Hrbek, to whom I presented the idea and who didn’t turn it down as a complete bullshit.
That AI could try writing a play.
Later, the team was joined by colleagues from DAMU.
We applied for the ETA programme of the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic and succeeded.
So, the whole two-year project was supported by the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic as applied research in social sciences.
Globally, it’s quite unique, there have already been some attempts to make AI write screenplays, short stories, fairy tales, poems.
And before I’ll give the floor to my colleagues, I’d like to try a little Turing test.
For you, hackers and viewers of our streaming.
If you agree, Rudolf?
Sure.
We’ve prepared a special opening.
I’ll have to start it on my device over there, but could you please explain what it is about?
It’s an excerpt from Čapek’s drama R.U.R.
I’ll read it quickly.
The first Robot says:
Master, the machines can’t work.
We can’t produce Robots.
The second Robot says: We’ve multiplied our efforts.
We have nowhere to put what we’ve produced.
Alquist says: Who for?
The second Robot: For the next generation.
The first Robot: Only Robots we can’t produce.
The machines keep emitting only bloody pieces of meat, skin doesn’t adhere to meat and meat to bones.
The machines are spitting out shapeless lumps.
The second Robot says: Humans knew the mystery of life. Tell us their secret.
This is what Čapek wrote in R.U.R.
What have you done with it?
We’ve used the tool we’ll be talking about today.
A tool that automatically generates theatre scripts.
And we used this as an input.
For those who know, it’s the GPT-2 language model.
And the tool then continued the text, which means it’s generated some sequel.
And we have a little task for you, where you’ll see two possible sequels.
One is the original one, from the real play RUR.
The second one was generated by our tool.
And your task will be to recognize what was written by a real person.
And what was generated by AI.
So, the instructions:
Text us your guess and let’s agree that what you see on your left side will be labelled “L”.
And what you see on the right side will be “P”.
Put your guesses in Slack, there is a channel called “Questions and answers”.
So, tell us through this channel, what you think was –
What is the question?
What was generated by a machine?
What was generated by a machine.
So let us know what you think was generated by a machine.
If you think it’s the one on the left, type “L” in Slack, in Q&A.
If you think the right side was generated by a machine, type “P”.
We’ll wait, or we can chat a bit and then –
Yeah, we can chat for a little while.
So, read, guess and vote.
Tell us, Rudolf, how is it done?
You’ve started with this dramatic Turing test.
How do you do theatre as a mathematician?
There’s a lot of difficult problems, of course.
But from the very beginning, we were surprised that the large language models on their own (we use the GPT-2 language model by OpenAI) are able to generate text that is quite good.
In English, only if you generate it in English.
The basis really is that you take this language model, prepare the input, we’ve seen.
And with a bit of luck, it works.
The model recognizes the form of the input, somehow.
And continues in a similar manner.
It generates names of the characters.
It generates some lines.
It sticks to the theme.
So, the beginning is actually simple.
And now I’ll ask David, the representative of the drama-side.
As a dramaturg of Švanda Theatre in Prague.
Tell us, please, what were your thoughts, when you were approached by Daniel with the idea of putting on a play here, in Švanda Theatre, the text and dialogues of which would written by AI?
At first, I thought that, as a dramaturg, I was born in a wrong time.
That I’ll be replaced by someone else soon.
But at the same time, I thought it important to take part in this project, because it could become an interesting tool for authors.
Not just for authors of theatre plays, but from my experience mainly of computer games that generates themselves, so to say.
It’s great that it’ll be possible to put there some artificially generated dialogue.
But it’s no secret that I’m approaching this theme with curiosity and healthy scepticism.
And, Tomáš, what were your feelings, when, I don’t know, maybe Rudolf here came with this idea.
Did you think: I want this, it sounds interesting.
Or did you think: Wtf?
I definitely thought that it was interesting and we should give it a try.
And that I’m curious how far we can get.
Can I have a question?
When I, as a layman, read about it, everyone, all worldwide experts, agree that although artificial intelligence is called intelligence, in reality, it isn’t intelligent at all.
It can’t understand anything.
And how can this –
I don’t know, ones, zeros that don’t have any reason to make statements about the world, but only follow orders of a person who pushes a button and they do something.
So how can they tell us something important about human life?
That’s a difficult question.
I think that one thing is what you’ve already mentioned before, during the introducing of the challenges.
That the border of what is and isn’t intelligent is still moving.
It is exactly as you said.
That means that we consider some kind of behaviour intelligent and replicate it mechanically.
For example, playing chess, that had been considered as intellectual for a long time, as very difficult.
And then it turned out that it’s quite easy to do it with a machine; well, you need a big computer performance that isn’t that big anymore from today’s point of view; anyway, it’s quite easy to do it with a machine.
And from that time, it isn’t considered as a proof of intelligence anymore.
If a machine can say something important, I don’t know.
To a certain degree, it is always some kind of copying of something that was put into the machine somehow.
On the other hand, even by copying or rearranging of different pieces you can create something that can tell us something interesting.
You can also ask if humans are intelligent, right?
Many people will tell you humans, too, only absorb things they’ve seen.
And recombine them and pass them on, so –
We can’t be too conceited about ourselves.
If I may, I would like to steel this question as well – just like in AZ quiz.
And I think we can learn quite a lot from what it writes.
Because the interesting thing is that it’s free of emotions, so it’s relatively an analytical tool.
And from the fact alone that the computer has learned a lot about us from the dialogues and scripts it has read.
I suppose that his offer would be based on some kind of statistics of things that most often appear in the scripts.
And from this point of view, the findings are very interesting.
For example, whichever two characters meet, very often they have sexual intercourse in the first phases, probably before the probability has changed.
Sexual intercourse happened, whichever two characters met, everything headed towards –
Not towards love, as writers claim, but towards the intercourse itself.
Well, that is interesting, that the neural network works only with things you put into it on one side, right?
And if you put there dramatic, in human life unique moments, then these gems are what you get.
On the other hand.
Our times demand it, these extreme situations simply catch our attention.
Maybe, we could go back to the Turing test that was adapted for a theatre dialogue.
Did you see the two columns there?
So, what is –
Which of them is –
I don’t know, now we can see them again.
So, I’ll ask Rudolf to reveal which one was computer generated, the left one or the right one?
Okay, I’ll reveal it.
Okay –
The left one was computer generated.
The left one.
If I see it correctly.
Maybe it’s necessary to check it on the screen.
But it’s obvious that even the author of the slide isn’t sure which is which at first glance.
But the computer generated is the column, the dialogue on the left side.
And we’ll have a look at our Slack, or I’ll ask my colleagues, if they are on Slack, to check, how many of you were correct.
However, these Turning tests show us that it is, in fact, already quite difficult, much more difficult to identify what was assisted by a machine.
Contrary to what was made by human alone or with assistance of a simpler machine or tool.
It’s a question, possibly for everyone, is there future in machines helping in theatre, machines like theatrical scenery or lights or some fog machines.
I don’t know, this is how I remember the theatre from my childhood, when we still went to the theatre.
But maybe, sometime in the future, AI will be one of those tools that will move the theatre ahead, or maybe no.
What do you think, David?
Well, that’s a question.
I think, there are possibilities.
But I think there’s one obstruction that is not technological.
It’s the vanity of authors and artists who think that we all need to feel that we are the original ones.
And I can’t imagine someone admitting to being helped by someone else with writing.
But I think that –
Or for me personally, as I watched the programme, the power of computer-generated things is actually in its randomness.
Often, an author is affected by some probability and realistic games that he or she rarely dares to violate some kind of logic.
Whereas a computer can offer some quite interesting detonators in this respect.
So, I can imagine that if I had some creative crisis I would generate some part of a dialogue that could inspire me for my further work.
But I don’t know if I would admit it.
At the same time, I think it gives you the opportunity to keep one’s distance as an author.
To say: It’s not my fault that the play is a bit stupid, right?
It was generated by AI, so it wants to tell us something.
And it’s our fault that we don’t understand it.
So, you get rid of the responsibility a bit.
That’s right, but I think it the way it could help with quantitative writing in the future is unbelievable.
I mean, really, there are created games, today, that are selfgenerating and the possibility that they could be accompanied by a selfgenereating dialogue is great.
I would like to ask all of you who are now watching our little workshop debate.
Please, you can ask question through our Slack Robothon 2021.
There is a channel called Questions and something.
Answers or Questions.
Questions, so post your questions.
And we will look at them in five minutes and we’ll try to answer some of the questions that we’ll get from you who are watching us and listening to us.
I would like to continue in what was said; that what you put into the network at the beginning as an input will influence the result.
As is shown by the tendency of AI to come up with a sexual intercourse in the first few minutes of the theatre play.
And their big theme that needs to be delt with concerning AI was exactly the bias as they call the partiality.
Which leads to situations such as the unsuccessful attempt with school applications in Britain, I think, when AI should assess some, I don’t know, loans and so on.
It can have this inequity in its code because of the inputs.
How do you, personally, see the possibility of regulation, monitoring; or should we try at all to make it right, somehow?
Or we should leave it with no regulations –
And not care about the fact that AI itself is biased by the inputs.
It is necessary to understand how AI works.
It can’t use anything except for the inputs we, humans, put into it.
So, it learns from the things that were created somewhere.
Those are, typically, some data that people make a provide somehow.
So, it’s not that AI alone would have some prejudice of its own, okay?
It reproduces the prejudice people already have.
So, it’s not like bad.
It’s good.
It’s so good it reproduced the clever things of ours including the wrong things.
So, that’s what’s happening.
And of course, there’re many studies dealing with the question how to make it better than humans.
Meaning that it would be just as smart as humans but without the bad prejudice.
Tomáš could probably say more about this topic.
I think we should try hard to fix these problems.
The question is how to do it technically, because the most advanced methods today, neural networks, are very difficult to interpret.
Actually, we don’t know exactly, how the neural network represents the data it has available.
And if we make decisions somewhere about some people, some group of these people will be systematically discriminated at this point.
That’s a pattern.
And it will logically transfer into the network.
And if the network sees from the data that this group of people isn’t admitted to the schools, it will assign them a lower probability as a result.
Without investigating if the reason they don’t get admitted is a factual one or if it’s some kind of prejudice.
That’s not included in the data.
How to get rid of it, that’s a difficult question.
Because deciding not to put there the things that cause the prejudices isn’t enough.
Because the data are correlated in some way.
There are studies about that.
It’s apparent even if you take CVs, for example, and try to analyse them automatically.
And you erase the data about race from the CVs, of course.
However, you can get it out, additionally, form the neural networks.
The information gets there, even though it is not written explicitly.
How to do it so it wouldn’t be there at all, that’s a difficult research problem.
Maybe during hackathon, some new hack will be discovered that will help free AI of the prejudices we have as imperfect, organic clumps of flesh and bones.
Or lumps, as he described it.
If you look at a human from inside, compared to the beauty of machines.
That’s one of the themes.
Maybe before we get to questions, I would like to ask David.
How –
Because Daniel said it as well that you’ll start practicing on Monday.
But you’ve already seen the script, right, it already exists.
Maybe you’ve already talked to actors about how do they feel about uttering words written not by a living author, but by an author that purrs, shines and blinks.
I think, in the first place, it will be more difficult for them to learn, because the lines aren’t always connected logically.
And secondly, the thing that is specific for the computer-generated lines is that the robot is a bit childlike.
Or like an autistic person in the sense that it doesn’t count with the option that not everything what is said must be true.
And we, when interpreting the text, will have to add some intrigues, so it would be interesting for the actors.
So we could justify that they say such things.
Because, very often, the most interesting thing is that someone says one thing and thinks something else.
That will probably be our biggest interpretative task.
Now, I’m checking if we have any questions.
But I can’t see –
Correct me if I’m wrong.
If we’ve got a question somewhere.
We can’t see anything, so feel free to ask.
We still have nine minutes left.
Nine minutes to ask the team of THEaiTRE.
Or the few representatives of the team, it actually consists of more people.
The mathematicians or psycholinguists or what was it The Guardian called you some time ago?
The Asimovian Psycholinguists and the dramatist like David here.
So I will ask about one more thing that is connected to the process of creating and to its transfer to theatre.
It is true that the whole play, meaning the title, some stage directions, roles and the structure of the acts.
Is it all written by AI, or is there –
How much of the final play that will be put on the stage on 26th February, also in one month, here in Švanda Theatre, is created by human or by a dramatist, dramaturg?
To put it in numbers, the part created by human does not represent more than approximately 10 %.
But the thing is, the part of a dramaturg in a play written by a living author is just as big, because the dramaturg gives some impulses.
Practically, the play consists of a couple of situations, dialogues, and the input was only one short stage direction.
That presented the setting of the situation, the characters and the first two lines of the dialogue.
And the rest was generated by a computer, where some of the lines were abridged or so.
Or we rejected where the dialogue was going and it started generating anew.
That’s quite the standard guidance of a dramaturg when someone’s writing a play.
The biggest intervention takes place, because the software isn’t capable of creating a bigger plot or I haven’t discovered the capability yet.
So, the overall script –
It depends on the order we put the generated situations in.
But this is a commonly used method of collage or montage.
That is also used for a text of an author.
So, we treat it as an author that is obedient and when we reject something it obeys us.
This was, basically, the vision we set in the beginning; there have been some texts that were created with the participation of AI and the participation was sometimes 10 %, sometimes 125 %.
And we thought, that’s not interesting anymore.
Let’s give AI a say as much as possible.
And we agreed to keep our interventions at minimum.
And actually, as David mentioned, they are at the same level as if the text was written by a human author.
Although it’s true that, so far, it generates the scenes separately, independently of each other.
Basically, the GPT-generated texts are linear, but the project goes on and this year, we are planning to improve this.
To do a hierarchical generating that would firstly generate some summary of the whole play.
And that would be later elaborated into separate scenes so that AI would have a say even in the structure of the play.
We’ll see how it turns out.
Okay, if you have any question, just write it to us.
You have the last chance to ask on Slack, because we have five minutes left.
And in precisely five minutes begins our Q&A dedicated to the individual topics and within this Q&A we will say something more about the theme of a creative AI with Rudolf.
But if you are interested in the project THEaiTRE that will premiere in Švanda Theatre on the 26th February.
That’s in a month, there will be a streaming at 7 p.m. from Švanda Theatre, on theaitre.com, and you all are invited to watch.
It’ll be a world’s premiere.
As far as we know, there hasn’t been such a full-length standard theatre play yet.
The theatre play will be followed by a discussion with my colleagues here.
And I think it’s going to be a unique opportunity to judge what does the machine creativity with a minimal human intervention looks like today.
And if it can prepare an entertaining, interesting and dramatic evening for you.
And as we have no questions, I would like to say thank you to our guests David, Rudolf and Tomáš for joining us for half an hour to discuss the topic of AI in dramatic production.
And I would like to ask the direction to play us a teaser that will entice you to come to the premiere on the 26th February.
